# Welcome to the Fish Forever AFAM Toolkit Dashboard!

We've tried to make using the AFAM Toolkit Dashboard simple and intuitive. The dashboard follows the steps outlined in the toolkit guidance document. Proceed through each step of the, working left to right through the tabs at the top of the dashboard. Each tab has additional instruction. For additional guidance during each step, consult the AFAM Toolkit Microsoft guidance document which you can download from Egnyte [here](https://files.rare.org/navigate/file/d0ea9258-a46e-4604-9583-2feccc36ff26). This dashboard is not intended to be a complete replacement for the guidance document, but rather a complement to the guidance document.

Please contact Gavin McDonald with any questions, comments, or feedback (gmcdonald@bren.ucsb.edu).

Toolkit Overview
================

**Version 1.7 (Last Updated: April 28, 2017)**

Purpose Statement
-----------------

-   This toolkit provides you the tools you
    will need to estimate how your fishery is doing and achieve your
    fishery goals by managing it adaptively. The toolkit will help you
    implement fisheries management measures based on your best available
    science, learn how these management interventions are performing,
    and then adjust them as necessary.

-   This toolkit will help you create an Adaptive Fisheries Management
    Plan, one of the four critical Fish Forever design specifications
    from the Fishery Management element of success of our program

-   Certain workbooks provided in this toolkit will help you calculate
    certain indicators of Global M&E Plan (CPUE, total landings, average
    length of key target species, fishing mortality of key target
    species, fish biomass inside the reserve, and fish biomass outside
    the reserve)

-   See Figure 1 below for a step-by-step process schematic of the
    toolkit

Suggested Audience
------------------

-   The toolkit is designed as a facilitation document that is led by
    one person. However, during each step, this person would work with a
    multi-stakeholder group to reach consensus and make decisions

-   The exact person who should facilitate this process will depend on
    team skills and goals from country programs. Here are two general
    approaches:

    -   The toolkit may be used by regional technical Rare staff, who
        may each support several FF sites

    -   The toolkit may also be used by technical staff at each FF site,
        such as the TURF-Reserve Specialist (TRS) or Assistant Campaign
        Fellow (ACF)

Skills Necessary to Use Toolkit
-------------------------------

-   General knowledge and skills in fisheries
    science (ecology, management, population dynamics, local policy)

-   Familiarity with the FF curriculum course “Managing Fisheries in a
    TURF-Reserve”

-   Familiarity with Excel

-   Facilitation skills to coordinate and lead multi-stakeholder
    discussions (see Pride curriculum)

-   Communication skills to effectively convey the benefits and
    tradeoffs of different fisheries assessment and management options
    to a variety of stakeholders

Toolkit Objectives 
-------------------

-   This toolkit provides a step-by-step
    process that you can use to analyze data, evaluate the performance
    of your fishery, choose management measures, and adjust management
    so that the fishery achieves your management objectives.
    Specifically, the toolkit helps managers:

    -   Select fisheries management controls (regulations) designed to
        help managers achieve their fisheries goals (i.e. limit fishing
        mortality, protect ecological and biological function, reduce
        bycatch, etc.)

    -   Determine which and how data should be used to monitor and
        evaluate target species and/or ecosystem status over time;

    -   Perform data-limited assessment techniques to evaluate fisheries
        performance using simple workbooks in Excel;

    -   Define a process for how fisheries assessment and management
        will be reviewed and adapted periodically over time, using the
        best available scientific data and local ecological knowledge

<!-- -->

-   By working through the above steps, this toolkit will help you
    create an Adaptive Fisheries Management Plan for TURF-Reserve sites.

-   Using data collected at your site, the Excel Workbooks, specifically
    those tabs related to data exploration and visualization, can be
    used as a “spot check” to detect problems with data collection
    sampling protocols. You may wish to revisit these workbooks
    frequently (every few months) during the beginning stages of data
    collection to adaptively correct problems.

When to Use the Toolkit
-----------------------

-   This toolkit has been designed to work holistically with the
    Fisheries Landscape Assessment and Goal Setting (FLAGS) Toolkit and
    with the TURF-Reserve Design Toolkit. In most Fish Forever sites, it
    is recommended that implementing partners work sequentially with
    communities and other relevant stakeholders through the toolkits to
    conduct assessments and make management decisions, starting with
    FLAGS, then TURF-Reserve Design, and finally the AFAM toolkits. To
    properly assess and manage your fishery, it will be important to
    have clearly articulated goals, prioritized species, and a
    TURF-Reserve system within which to implement fisheries management –
    these steps are all accomplished through the use of the FLAGS and
    TURF-Reserve Design Toolkits. At the very least, the TURF-Reserve
    Design Survey will also be a required data input to the AFAM
    toolkit. It should be noted, however, that regardless of when the
    AFAM toolkit will be used at your site, fishery-dependent and
    fishery-independent monitoring and data collection should start as
    soon as possible, as outlined in the Global Monitoring & Evaluation
    Plan. Please see the following section for a more detailed
    description of data requirements and recommendations.

-   Once your site is ready to use the AFAM toolkit, the toolkit should
    be used on an annual basis at least for the first few years in order
    to take advantage of the adaptive nature of this framework. As time
    progresses and more data and information become available for the
    fishery, different assessment and management tiers should be used.
    Additionally, as technical capacity for data analysis develops at
    your site, more advanced assessment methods may be appropriate. Due
    to changing biological, ecological, environmental, and socioeconomic
    conditions, it will also be important to perform each assessment
    method on an annual basis in order to measure changes in the fishery
    and adjust fisheries management controls accordingly.

Data Necessary to Use the Toolkit
---------------------------------

Below we describe the minimum data requirements as well as additional
optional data that is recommended but not required. For each type of
data, we list the Fish Forever data stream or toolkit outputs that the
AFAM toolkit can use. For each data stream or toolkit output, we also
describe exactly what information the AFAM toolkit will use from that
source. While we recommend that sites use the toolkits and data stream
collection protocols outlined in the Global M&E Plan and the FF Data
Collection Manual, we realize some regions may have other tools or data
collection processes for getting the same type of information. The AFAM
toolkit can be used with whatever data is available, although the most
important types of data for data-limited fisheries assessment come from
catch reporting, boat intercept or landing site surveys,
fishery-dependent length composition surveys, and fishery-independent
surveys (using underwater visual surveys or experimental fishing).

Table 1: Minimum required and optional recommended data for using the
AFAM Toolkit

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Minimum Required Data**
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Fish Forever Data Stream or Toolkit Outputs**                                                                                  **What information the AFAM Toolkit will use**

  TURF-Reserve Design Survey                                                                                                       Qualitative characterization of the fishery (including local history, gear types, target species, fishing locations, fishing seasons, etc)

  TURF-Reserve Design Toolkit Outputs (*or other regional tool that yields the same outputs*)                                      TURF and Reserve size and location

  FLAGS Toolkit Outputs (*or other regional tool that yields the same outputs*)                                                    List or prioritized species for management
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   List or prioritized goals for management
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   Estimated vulnerability of prioritized target species

  **Additional Recommended Data**

  **Fish Forever Data Stream**                                                                                                     **What information the AFAM Toolkit will use**

  Individual Catch reporting system                                                                                                Landings, effort, and CPUE of key target species

  Boat-intercept or landing site survey                                                                                            Landings, effort, and CPUE of key target species

  Fishery-dependent length-composition survey                                                                                      Length composition data of key target species

  Fishery-independent survey (Underwater visual survey or Experimental Fishing)                                                    Fished:Unfished density ratio (key target species) Coral reef thresholds (aggregated across species – only for underwater visual survey)

  KAP Survey                                                                                                                       Household survey data on the community’s knowledge, attitudes, interpersonal communication, and practices relating to fisheries management

  Social Impact / Household Survey                                                                                                 Household survey data on the impact fisheries management is having on the community

  Enforcement Logbooks                                                                                                             Information on violations of the NTZ and violations of TURF regulations

  Qualitative information from campaign research (i.e., in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, barrier removal workshops)   Qualitative information on the community’s preparedness for implementing fisheries management and what barriers that may need to first be removed
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Supporting Documents
--------------------

-   There are accompanying Excel workbooks that provide how-to
    instructions for using each assessment method, in addition to the
    step-by-step decision support framework provided in this document as
    well as the worksheet, tables, and figures in the appendices,. The
    FF curriculum course “Managing Fisheries in a TURF-Reserve” is also
    a resource for background material.

How this Toolkit was Developed
------------------------------

This toolkit builds on extensive research over the past decades in
data-limited fisheries assessment and management approaches (see
Appendix 8 – References for a list of the approaches this toolkit draws
from). This toolkit also utilizes extensive first-hand experience in
designing a similar Adaptive Management Framework for the Belizean conch
and lobster fisheries, an initiative undertaken between the Belize
Fisheries Department, Belize Science Team, and several members of the
Fish Forever team (McDonald *et al.*, 2014, manuscript included in AFAM
package).

Introduction – How to use this toolkit
======================================

This toolkit will guide you through an eight-step process that should be
conducted on an annual basis. Figures and table that are referenced in
the text are mostly contained in the appendix, and are also hyperlinked
in the word document for easily moving back and forth. Appendices and
steps are also hyperlinked. Hyperlinks throughout the document are
*underlined*. Definitions of many terms throughout this document can be
found in the Glossary (Appendix 6 – Glossary). Words or phrases that are
found in the glossary are often *italicized*.

The toolkit also includes a worksheet in Appendix 1 – Your AFAM Toolkit
Worksheet that you can use throughout the process to document and
consolidate decisions and notes from each step. Specific instructions
are provided at the end of each step to guide you in filling out the
worksheet. These instructions are in blue boxes. Each step of the
process has one or more corresponding tables in the worksheet. This
worksheet should be filled out each time you use the toolkit. This
record will be used to develop or modify your Fishery Management Plan
and will be helpful when re-visiting the toolkit in the future (Appendix
9 – Fishery Management Plan Template).

**8 Steps in the Toolkit:**

The toolkit process is broken into 8 steps, shown in the schematic
(Figure 1) and described below.

Figure 1: AFAM Toolkit 8-step Schematic

1.  Step 1 – Determine Assessment and Management Tier

    a.  Your assessment and management tier is based on the data you
        have available and will determine what assessment and management
        options you have at your disposal

2.  Step 2 – Determine Appropriate Fisheries Management Controls

    a.  Fishery management controls are what allow managers to limit
        aspects of fishing behavior to limit fishing mortality or to
        protect key biological or ecological function (i.e., Total
        Allowable Catch or seasonal closures to protect spawning
        aggregations)

3.  Step 3 – Select Performance Indicators, Reference Points, and
    Assessment Methods

    a.  Performance indicators are numerical values based on data that
        give an indication of how the fishery is performing relative to
        a reference point. Reference points may define either a target
        where you want the fishery to move towards or a limit where you
        want the fishery to stay away from. The assessment method is the
        technique for calculating your performance indicator using
        available data. For example, a performance indicator could be
        fishing mortality with a target reference point of natural
        mortality. In this case, the assessment method to calculate
        fishing mortality could be Catch Curve.

4.  Step 4 – Define Harvest Control Rules

    a.  A harvest control rule helps stakeholders to compare performance
        indicators with reference points and adjust fisheries management
        controls accordingly. In other words, a harvest control rule is
        a plan for pre-agreed management actions as a function of
        variables related to the status of stock in question. For
        example, a simple harvest control rule could specify that if
        fishing mortality is above natural mortality, the Total
        Allowable Catch should be reduced.

5.  Step 5 - Perform Assessment Methods

    a.  You will learn about the various types of assessment methods and
        use the appropriate assessment method to calculate your selected
        performance indicators and reference points. This section
        provides a “how-to” guide for using each assessment method.
        Excel workbooks will accompany some assessment methods.

6.  Step 6 – Interpret Assessment Results

    a.  You will interpret your assessment results, together with local
        ecological knowledge and other available data, to determine if a
        management response is required or not.

7.  Step 7 – Adjust Fisheries Management Controls Using Defined Harvest
    Control Rules

    a.  You will use the harvest control rules defined in Step 4 and the
        interpretations generated in Step 6 to adjust fisheries
        management controls appropriately.

8.  Step 8 – Complete your Fishery Management Plan

    a.  You will use the outputs of the AFAM toolkit as well as other
        Fish Forever documents to fill out a Fishery Management Plan
        template for your fishery. Note that the template provided here
        may need to be adapted to better suit regional context.

***Engaging Stakeholders:***

Adaptive fisheries management is a stakeholder-driven process. A
multi-stakeholder participatory process should be conducted to select
and identify fisheries management control options, performance
indicators, reference points, and harvest control rules. It is important
that the entire adaptive management process be participatory in order
to: 1) draw on the knowledge of scientists, resource users, government
agencies, and others; 2) create common goals and a common understanding
of the fishery; and 3) create a context for learning together and
working cooperatively. This reduces uncertainty and conflict while
increasing the likelihood of compliance with regulations generated by
the adaptive management process. Throughout the process, you should
consult any existing KAP or Social Impact survey data in order to gain
an understanding of how changes in management may be received by
community members. **Decisions made in Steps 2-7 should be discussed
with relevant stakeholders and outputs should be broadly disseminated.**

The exact stakeholders that should be involved will depend on the
regional context and the specific step. A group of individuals, such as
a Technical Working Group, could be formed to work through these
decisions. Here is a list of recommended stakeholders who should be
involved in each step:

1.  Step 1 – Toolkit facilitator

2.  Step 2 – Toolkit facilitator, fishers, market vendors or middle men,
    local or international scientists (if available), local decision
    makers (i.e., government officials)

3.  Step 3 – Toolkit facilitator, fishers, market vendors or middle men,
    local or international scientists (if available), local decision
    makers (i.e., government officials)

4.  Step 4 – Toolkit facilitator, fishers, market vendors or middle men,
    local or international scientists (if available), local decision
    makers (i.e., government officials)

5.  Step 5 – Toolkit facilitator

6.  Step 6 – Toolkit facilitator, fishers, market vendors or middle men,
    local or international scientists (if available), local decision
    makers (i.e., government officials)

7.  Step 7 – Toolkit facilitator, local decision makers (i.e.,
    government officials)

8.  Step 8 – Toolkit facilitator, local decision makers (i.e.,
    government officials)

